---
layout: blog_entry
title: "Markov Chains in the 'Real World' (IRC Bot Part 2)"
---

Same intro from [last time][1]:

So you know where we are going, the goal of this project is to create an IRC
bot that responds to the channel with statements seeds from that channel.  To
do this, I will create a Markov chain data structure, which can modify itself
to update with the current conversations of the room.

You can find the code for the Markov chain in [this repo](https://github.com/mgaut72/MarkovChain).

I am aware of [IRC Bot library](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/ircbot-0.6.0),
but I want to do some exploring.
There is a [roll your own IRC bot tutorial](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Roll_your_own_IRC_bot)
that seemed like a good place to
start.  It had pretty much everything I needed, but some stuff I didn't.

## Reader vs. State
The IRC bot presented in the tutorial, the 'Bot' is
held in a reader monad.  The Bot most importantly consists of a
network socket connected to the IRC channel.  It is simply capable of logging
channel activity to stdout, and telling the channel some pretty basic things
about itself.  I want to modify the bot to contain a Markov chain of words that
have come out of the IRC channel. Then, as conversation in the channel
progresses, the bot updates its Markov chain accordingly.

The reader monad is perfect for the needs of the demo IRC bot. Put simply, the
time to use is a reader monad is when you want some read-only state in your
program, such as a network socket connected to and IRC channel.

However, when we want to store the Markov chain as part of the state associated
with our IRC bot, the reader monad is no longer the best tool for the job.
Since the reader monad doesn't really play well with updating the state it
contains, it would be difficult to update the Markov chain associated with the
bot.  Queue the state monad.  The state monad is more general than the reader
monad, in that it readily supports reading, writing and updating the state
it contains.  This is perfect for the MarkovBot, which needs to be able to get
the network socket in addition to being able to update the Markov chain.

## Transitioning from Reader to State
The transition was pretty smooth. Getting the state from the reader monad
involves using the `asks` function, where
{% highlight haskell %}
ghci> import Control.Monad.Reader
ghci> :t asks
asks :: MonadReader r m => (r -> a) -> m a
{% endhighlight %}
Basically, we have some reader monad, and a function to extract a particular
value from our state, and we get that value out in the monad we are
parameterized over.
This function is nearly identical to the state monad's `gets` function, where
{% highlight haskell %}
ghci> import Control.Monad.State
ghci> :t gets
gets :: MonadState s m => (s -> a) -> m a
{% endhighlight %}

The interface is exactly the same, so lucky us!

Then, in order to update the Markov chain, we can use the `modify` function on
the state monad. `modify` just does a `gets` on the state, followed by some
modification of the value, then `puts` it back into the state monad.
All we need to do is build a new Markov chain with the new
IRC conversation, and use the fact that our data structure is a monoid instance
to combine them to update our chain and update the bot.

[1]: {% post_url 2014-05-27-Markov_Chain_Monoid_Instance %}
